From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search









This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This biographical article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this biographical article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (June 2011)







The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for biographies. Please help to establish notability by adding reliable, secondary sources about the topic. If notability cannot be established, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted.
Find sources: "Csaba P. Kovesdy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR · free images (June 2015)







This article is an orphan, as no other articles link to it. Please introduce links to this page from related articles; try the Find link tool for suggestions. (September 2015)










Csaba P. Kovesdy


Education
M.D., Pecs University Medical School, Pécs, Hungary (1995)


Known for
Research in nephrology


Csaba P. Kovesdy is an American nephrologist and a Professor of Medicine-Nephrology at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center[1] as well as Chief of Nephrology at the Memphis Veterans Affairs Medical Center.[2] He is also affiliated with Methodist Hospitals of Memphis and Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, also in Memphis.[3]
Kovesdy received his M.D. degree from the Pecs University Medical School in Pécs, Hungary in 1995.[4] He received additional medical training at Johns Hopkins University and at the Henry Ford Hospital of Wayne State University.[3] Kovesdy is board certified in nephrology and internal medicine and he is licensed to practice in Tennessee and Virginia.[2]
Kovesdky is an author of more than 160 articles regarding epidemiology and its outcomes. His contributions are studies of the association of secondary hyperparathyroidism with increased mortality, obesity survival paradox, protein-energy malnutrition in non-dialysis dependent chronic kidney disease (NDD-CKD) patients, and the systematic presentation of the concept of "burnt-out" diabetes mellitus.[5] His other areas of research include cardiovascular risk factors, bone-mineral metabolism, metabolic abnormalities and race-ethnicity.[1]
References[edit]


^ a b "Kovesdy, Csaba P.", University of Tennessee Health Science Center faculty facepage
^ a b "Health Care Providers / K / Csaba P. Kovesdy" on the Memphis VA Medical Center website
^ a b "Csaba Kovesdy, MD" on Doximity
^ "Dr. Csaba P. Kovesdy, MD" WebMD Physician Directory
^ "Csaba P. Kovesdy, M.D.". University of Virginia School of Medicine. FASN. Retrieved October 29, 2012. 





 
						