From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

Not to be confused with The Dogs of War (comics).


Dogs of War


Publication information


Publisher
Defiant Comics


First appearance
Warriors of Plasm #1
August 1993


Created by
Jim Shooter


In-story information


Alter ego
Elvis Mazerov


Team affiliations
Warriors of Plasm


Notable aliases
Shooter


Abilities
Ability to turn invisible


Dogs of War is a comic book series originally published by Defiant Comics from April 1994 until August 1994. The series lasted only five issues before Defiant ceased publication of the title.
The book was based on characters created by Jim Shooter. Most of the issues were comceptualized by Shooter, and written by Art Holcomb and penciled by artist Georges Jeanty.



Contents


1 Characters
2 Publication history
3 The Schism that never was
4 References



Characters[edit]

Shooter - Elvis Mazerov, an ex-military officer, was the feature character of Dogs of War. Nicknamed after his creator, Jim Shooter, Elvis gained his powers — the ability to turn invisible — when he was abducted by aliens, taken to another planet and had his DNA altered through bioengineering.


Moose - Moose gained his powers when he was abducted by aliens, taken to another planet and had his DNA altered through bioengineering.

Publication history[edit]
Elvis' story began in the Warriors of Plasm comic where he was originally introduced and featured. Dogs of War is a spin-off of Warriors of Plasm.
The Schism that never was[edit]
Originally, Jim Shooter, the founder and Editor-in-Chief of Defiant Comics, had planned to publish an inner-company "crossover" featuring all the characters and titles in the Defiant universe.
The crossover was a concept Shooter had originally developed during his tenure as Editor-in-Chief at Marvel Comics. His Secret Wars crossover with Marvel was originally a big hit with comic fans. Shooter would later revive the idea again while Editor-in-Chief at Valiant Comics, with the Unity crossover; another big hit with fans in the summer of 1992.
This time the crossover was to be called Schism. However, only two issues (Dogs of War #5 and Warriors of Plasm #13) made it onto comic store shelves before the company ceased publication of all its titles.
References[edit]


'Dogs of War' at the Grand Comics Database
Dogs of War at the Comic Book DB





 
						