From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search



Gigi in Paradisco





Studio album by Dalida


Released
1980


Recorded
1979-1980


Genre
World music, Pop music, Disco, Adult contemporary music


Label
Orlando International Shows, Carrere


Dalida chronology





Dédié à toi (Monday Tuesday)
(1979)
Gigi in Paradisco
(1980)
Olympia 81
(1981)





Gigi in Paradisco is a bilingual French and English-language album released in 1980 by French singer Dalida. Two singles were released, both of which received gold certifications.



Contents


1 Background
2 Track listing
3 Singles
4 Notes
5 References



Background[edit]
This album was launched after a highly successful American-style series of shows that Dalida performed at the Palais des Sports theatre in France. She was the first female singer to perform this kind of show at the venue[1] with twelve costume changes and eleven dancers.[2] All the show's 18 nights were sell-outs.[3]
The album, like the show, was highly successful and it was a critical and commercial success for Dalida that turned her image through it into a more sexy and Diva like image, securing her as the queen of disco in France. Learning dance routines for over three months with John Travolta's Saturday Night Fever choreographer Lester Wilson, Dalida (aged 47 at the time) reinvented herself through this show and once more attracted a new generation of fans whilst keeping her loyal older followers happy.[4]
Track listing[edit]

"Gigi in Paradisco"
"Comme disait Mistinguett"
"Alabama Song" (English)
"ll faut danser reggae"
"Money, money" (English)
"Je suis toutes les femmes"

Singles[edit]

"Il faut danser reggae" / "Comme disait Mistinguett"

This single was released in 1979, before the album was out. "Il faut danser Reggae" was a reggae song which broke out of the disco trend of the time. TV performances of this track saw Dalida dancing in leopard-print dresses in tropical style while surrounded by topless male dancers. "Comme disait Mistinguett" talks about Dalida's music career with a bit of humour. For TV promotion of the song, Dalida wore a long pink cape with a sexy outfit underneath it showing off a very attractive figure. It won her a gold disc.[1]
It was during this disco period that Dalida started to gain following in the gay community, which is still maintained today.[5]

"Gigi in Paradisco" / "Je suis toutes les femmes"

"Gigi in Paradisco", the title track of the album, was released as a single in 1980. The song is the continuation of Dalida's biggest worldwide hit "Gigi l'amoroso". The 13-minute song follows the tragic events of Gigi that dies and goes up to disco heaven. Dalida created this song essentially to use during her shows but eventually it was released as a single, with the track being edited to four minutes. It was Dalida's last disco hit, and it also earned gold certification.[1]
Notes[edit]


^ a b c Dalida Official Website. "Dalida Official Rewards & Certifications". Year 1980. Retrieved 5 October 2011. 
^ RFI Musique. "Dalida Biography". 1980 - Dalida Brings a Touch of Broadway to Paris. Retrieved 4 October 2011. 
^ Dalida Official website. "Dalida Official Biography". Retrieved 4 October 2011. ... All eighteen shows were sold out ...' 
^ Dalida Official website. "Dalida Official Biography" (in Hebrew). Retrieved 4 October 2011. ... Dalida ovedet im hachoreograph shel John Travolta - Lester Wilson vemofia be Heihal ha Sport bemesheh 3 shavuot. ...' 
^ Musictory the Music Directory. "Dalida Biography". Retrieved 4 October 2011. ... During this disco period, Dalida would earn a gay audience, a following which is still maintained today.  ...' 


References[edit]

L’argus Dalida: Discographie mondiale et cotations, by Daniel Lesueur, Éditions Alternatives, 2004. ISBN 2-86227-428-3 and ISBN 978-2-86227-428-7. (French)
Dalida Official Website (English) (French)









v
t
e


Dalida






Studio albums



Son nom est Dalida
Miguel
Gondolier
Les Gitans
Le disque d'or de Dalida
Love in Portofino (A San Cristina)
Les enfants du Pirée
Garde-moi la dernière danse
Loin de moi
Milord
Rendez-vous mit Dalida
Le petit Gonzales
Eux
Amore Scusami (Amour excuse-moi)
Il Silenzio (Bonsoir mon amour)
Pensiamoci Ogni Sera
Olympia 67
Piccolo Ragazzo
Un pò d'amore
Le temps des fleurs
Canta in Italiano
Ma mère me disait
In Deutsch
Ils ont changé ma chanson
Une vie
Il faut du temps
Sings in Italian for You
Julien
Manuel
Sempre più
J'attendrai
Coup de chapeau au passé
Die neuen lieder der Dalida
Femme est la nuit
Salma ya salama
Génération 78
Dédié à toi (Monday Tuesday)
Gigi in Paradisco
Olympia 81
Spécial Dalida
Mondialement vôtre
Les p'tits mots / Ton prénom dans mon cœur
Dali
Le visage de l'amour








Compilations



The Best of Dalida
Les Années Barclay : 1956-1970
Les Années Orlando : 1970-1997
Italia Mia
Master Série
La Légende
Dalida Story
Les 101 plus belles chansons
Les Années Disco
The Queen
Sus mas grandes exitos en español
Dalida (Deutsch Gesang) Ihre Grossen Erfolge
Dalida: Glamorous
Arabian Songs
D'ici et d'ailleurs
Collection Intégrale DALIDA 1956-1987
Tigani bi arab








Remix albums



Comme si j'étais là...
À ma manière...
L'an 2005
Collection
Collezzione
Le Rêve Oriental
Révolution 5° du nom








Live albums



Olympia 1959
Olympia 1971
Olympia 1974
Olympia 1977
Palais des Sports 1980
Live! Instants d'Émotions








Soundtracks



Pour toujours
Dalida: Le Film








Popular songs



"Bambino"
"Gondolier"
"Come prima"
"Romantica"
"Les enfants du Pirée"
"Itsy Bitsy Petit Bikini"








Video compliations



Dalida: Éternelle
Discofilm
Dalida idéale
Karaoké Dalida
Dalida Pour Toujours
Discofilm
Dalida: Le Grand Voyage
Dalida Passionnément
Dalida: Une Vie








Video singles



To Add








Live releases



Dalida Éternelle








Motion pictures



Joseph and His Brothers
Le Masque de Toutankhamon
Sigara wa Kass (A Glass and a Cigarette)
Brigade des mœurs
Rapt au deuxième bureau (aka Operation Abduction)
Parlez-moi d'amour (aka "Che femmina... e che dollari!)
L'inconnue de Hong Kong (aka Stranger from Hong-Kong)
Menage all'italiana (aka Menage Italian Style)
Io ti amo
Comme sur des roulettes
Le sixième jour (aka "The Sixth Day")
Dalida: Le Film








Documentaries



Dalida Pour Toujours
Le Grand Voyage








Related topics



Albums
Singles
Remix albums
List of Dalida songs
Miss Egypt
Barclay Records
Carrere Records
Orlando Records











 
						