From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

This article is about the London theatre in St. Martin's Lane.  For the former building to the east of Regent's Park, see London Colosseum.  For other uses, see Coliseum Theatre (disambiguation).

London Coliseum

The Coliseum Theatre
London Coliseum Theatre of Varieties



The London Coliseum in April 2004



Address
St. Martin's Lane
Westminster, London
United Kingdom


Coordinates
51°30′35″N 0°07′35″W﻿ / ﻿51.509722°N 0.126389°W﻿ / 51.509722; -0.126389


Owner
English National Opera


Designation
Grade II*


Type
Opera House


Capacity
2,558 seats on 3 tiers (4 levels)[1]


Construction


Opened
1904


Rebuilt
2000 – 2004, Aedas RHWL


Architect
Frank Matcham


Website


www.eno.org






Interior view of the house, 2011






Interior view of the house, 2015






View towards the stage


The London Coliseum (also known as the Coliseum Theatre) is a theatre in St. Martin's Lane, central London, built as one of London's largest and most luxurious "family" variety theatres. Opened on 24 December 1904 as the London Coliseum Theatre of Varieties, it was designed by the theatrical architect Frank Matcham for the impresario Oswald Stoll.[1] Their ambition was to build the largest and finest music hall, described as the "people's palace of entertainment" of its age.[2]
At the time of construction, it was the only theatre in Europe that provided lifts for taking patrons to the upper levels of the house, and was the first theatre in England to have a triple revolve installed on its stage. The theatre has 2,359 seats which makes it the largest theatre in London.
After being used for variety shows, musical comedies, and stage plays for many years, then as a cinema screening films in the Cinerama format between 1961 and 1968, the Sadler's Wells Opera Company moved into the building in 1968. The Sadler's Wells company changed its name to the English National Opera in 1974 and today it is used primarily for opera as well as being the London home of the English National Ballet.



Contents


1 History
2 Technical aspects
3 Use as a cinema
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



History[edit]
The London Coliseum was built by the theatrical architect Frank Matcham who intended it to be one of London's largest and most luxurious "family" variety theatres. Construction started in 1903 and it opened on 24 December the following year as the London Coliseum Theatre of Varieties. It is located in St. Martin's Lane, London.[3]
Matcham built the theatre for the theatrical impresario Sir Oswald Stoll and had the ambition of it being the largest and finest "People’s palace of entertainment" of the age. [3]
Matcham wanted a Theatre of Variety – not a music hall but equally not highbrow entertainment. The resulting programme was a mix of music hall and variety theatre, with one act - a full scale revolving chariot race - requiring the stage to revolve. The theatre’s original slogan was PRO BONO PUBLICO (For the public good). It was opened in 1904 and the inaugural performance was a variety bill on 24 December that year.
English Heritage, in its description of the theatre when it was given listed status in 1960 notes that it is "exuberant Free Baroque ambitious design, the Edwardian "Theatre de Luxe of London" with richly decorated interiors and a vast and grandiose auditorium."[4] The description continues: "Lavish foyer and circulation areas with marble facings, culminating in vast 3-tier auditorium with wealth of eclectic classical detail of Byzantine opulence, some motifs such as the squat columns dividing the lowest tier of slip boxes, backing the stalls, almost Sullivanesque; pairs of 2-tiered bow fronted boxes with domed canopies at gallery level and semi-domed, Ionic-columned pairs of 2 tiered orchestra boxes, contained in arched and pedimented frames surmounted by sculptural groups with lion-drawn chariots. Great, semi-circular, blocked architrave proscenium arch with cartouche- trophy keystone."[4]
The inaugural performance was a variety bill on 24 December 1904, but it "was a total failure and closed down completely only two years after opening in 1906 and remained closed until December of 1907 when it was reopened and at last became successful."[2] In 1908, the London Coliseum was host to a cricket match between Middlesex and Surrey.[5]
In 1911, dramatist W. S. Gilbert produced his last play here, The Hooligan.
The theatre changed its name from the London Coliseum to the Coliseum Theatre between 1931 and 1968 when a run of 651 performances of the musical comedy White Horse Inn began on 8 April 1931. Additionally, Arthur Lewis notes[2] that:

Pantomimes began in 1936 with Cinderella and continued regularly until 1946. In 1947 the musical Annie Get Your Gun was staged at the Coliseum and had a staggeringly successful run for the time, of 1,304 performances and three continuous years which was the longest run in theatrical history.

There then followed a long run of major American hits beginning with Kiss Me, Kate in 1951, Guys And Dolls in 1953, Pajama Game in 1955, and Damn Yankees in 1957. But this exceptional period did at last come to an end in 1957 when the production of The Bells Are Ringing failed to enthrall anyone.
The Coliseum reverted to the original name when the Sadler's Wells Opera Company moved there in 1968 and, in 1974, the Company changed its name to become the English National Opera; it bought the freehold of the building for £12.8 million in 1992.[2] The Coliseum hosted both the 2004 and 2006 Royal Variety Performances and is also the London base for performances by English National Ballet, which perform regular seasons throughout the year when not on tour.
Technical aspects[edit]
While its wing space is limited due to the constricted site on which the theatre was built, as Lloyd notes, "the stage of the London Coliseum was also on a vast scale; 55 feet wide by 92 feet deep".[2] The stage is not raked. It has the widest proscenium arch in London and was one of the first to have electric lighting. It was built with a triple revolving stage, although this was rarely used. The Coliseum was designed to seat 2,358 people on four levels.[2] As such it is the largest of all London's theatres.[3]
The theatre retains many of its original features and was given a Grade II* listed building by English Heritage in September 1960. Prior to Sadler's Wells Opera Company taking over the Coliseum in 1968, the house was "fully restored, redecorated, and a large orchestra pit installed....On 21 August 1968, with a production of Don Giovanni" opera appeared at the Coliseum.[2]
Another extensive renovation took place between 2000 and 2004.[4][6] when the design team included the architects RHWL and Arup as acousticians and building engineers.
Use as a cinema[edit]
Periodically, the Coliseum was used to show films and, when the "'Talkies' arrived at the Coliseum in 1933, films were run at the Theatre for a year. The greatest sensation at this time was the showing of King Kong which ran at the Coliseum for months with 10,000 people seeing the film at the Theatre every day."[2]
However, after a lackluster period of poorly received musicals came to an end, in June 1961 the theatre was leased by MGM for use as a cinema during the period that the Empire, Leicester Square was closed for rebuilding. The initial presentation, from 6 June, was a revival of Gone With the Wind which ran for 3 months. On 2 November the World Premiere of Bachelor in Paradise took place in the presence of the film's star, Bob Hope, and following this, on 15 November, was the UK premiere of Samuel Bronston's epic King of Kings. MGM continued to use the theatre even after the new Empire, Leicester Square reopened in December 1962, but MGM's lease expired on 19 May 1963 and the theatre was then leased by the Cinerama Corporation to become the second of London's Cinerama locations (after the Casino Cinerama).




A typical Cinerama-size curved screen


Conversion to three-strip projection which used three projectors was undertaken, and an 80ft wide, 30ft tall deeply curved screen was installed. Beginning on 16 July 1963, the theatre was renamed the Coliseum Cinerama, with the UK premiere of The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm. This film transferred to the third of London's Cinerama houses, the Royalty Theatre on 27 November and the Coliseum was converted for single-projector Cinerama using 70mm film for the Gala UK Premiere of It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, World on 2 December 1963. Other 70mm films followed, The Magnificent Showman (the UK Title of Circus World), The Great Race (a 35mm "blow up") and The Bible. With fewer films made in the format, it later became difficult to programme the theatre. It resorted to revivals of old 70mm movies before opening The Comedians on January 18 1968 (a 70mm Panavision blow up). This ran for nine weeks and was followed by a revival of the 1956 Todd-AO epic Around the World in 80 Days, the first time this film had been shown in 70mm in London. This ran until 22 May 1968 when Cinerama pulled out and the theatre reverted to live use.[1]
References[edit]


^ a b c KenRoe. "London Coliseum". Cinema Treasures. Retrieved 15 January 2010. 
^ a b c d e f g h Lloyd, Arthur. "The London Coliseum, St. Martin's Lane, London, WC2". Arthurlloyd.co.uk. Retrieved 28 November 2014. 
^ a b c "History of the Coliseum", English National Opera, accessed 26 July 2015.
^ a b c Historic England. "Details from image database (426935)". Images of England. Retrieved 28 April 2007. 
^ "When cricket hit the West End". ESPN Cricinfo. 18 January 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ Higgins, Charlotte (15 December 2005). "The Guardian Profile: Martin Smith". The Guardian. (London). Retrieved 23 January 2013. 


Further reading[edit]

Earl, John and Michael Sell, Guide to British Theatres 1750–1950, Theatres Trust, 2000 pp. 121–122 ISBN 0-7136-5688-3
Glasstone, Victor, Victorian and Edwardian Theatres London: Thames and Hudson, 1975

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coliseum Theatre.



English National Opera site
London Theatre Guide with what's on at the London Coliseum









v
t
e


Theatres in London






West End





Ambassador Theatre Group




Apollo Victoria
Duke of York's
Fortune
Harold Pinter
Lyceum
Phoenix
Piccadilly
Playhouse
Savoy
Trafalgar Studios









Delfont Mackintosh Theatres




Ambassadors
Gielgud
Noël Coward
Novello
Prince Edward
Prince of Wales
Queen's
Victoria Palace
Wyndham's









Nederlander Organization




Adelphi
Aldwych
Dominion









Nimax Theatres




Apollo
Duchess
Garrick
Lyric
Vaudeville
Palace









Really Useful Group Theatres




Cambridge
Drury Lane
Her Majesty's
London Palladium
New London









Other




Arts
Criterion
Haymarket
Shaftesbury
St. James
St. Martin's











Other major
theatres



Barbican Centre
Donmar Warehouse
London Coliseum
New Wimbledon
The Old Vic
Open Air
Peacock
Royal National
Royal Opera House
Sadler's Wells
Sam Wanamaker Playhouse
Shakespeare's Globe








Off West End



Almeida
Arcola
Battersea Arts Centre
Bush
Hampstead
Lyric Hammersmith
Menier Chocolate Factory
Royal Court
Soho
Tricycle
Young Vic








Fringe and
suburban



Above the Stag
artsdepot
Ashcroft
Barons Court
Beck
Bob Hope
Bloomsbury
The Broadway
Broadway
Brockley Jack
Brookside
Canal Café
Chelsea
Churchill
Cockpit
Courtyard
Compass
Erith Playhouse
Etcetera
Finborough
Gate
Greenwich
Hackney Empire
Hen and Chickens
Hoxton Hall
ICA
Intimate Theatre
Jacksons Lane
Jermyn Street
King's Head
Landor
Leicester Square
Little Angel
Millfield
New Players'
Old Red Lion
Orange Tree
Ovalhouse
Park
Pentameters
The Place
Pleasance Islington
The Print Room
Queen's, Hornchurch
The Questors
RADA Studios
Richmond
Riverside Studios
Rose, Kingston
Shaw
South London
Southwark Playhouse
The Space
Stratford Circus
Tabard
Theatre 503
Theatre Royal Stratford East
Troxy
Unicorn
Union
Upstairs at The Gatehouse
White Bear
Wilton's








Former



Bolton's Theatre Club
Cochrane
Cock Tavern
Greenwich Playhouse
Mermaid
New End
Saville
Warehouse
Westminster











 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


London landmarks






Buildings and
structures





Bridges




Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
London Bridge
Millennium Bridge
Tower Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge









Entertainment
venues






Cinemas




Empire, Leicester Square
London IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square









Premier League/International
football venues




Wembley Stadium (multi-use)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal FC)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace FC)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea FC)
Boleyn Ground (West Ham FC)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur FC)









Other major
sports venues




All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's Cricket Ground
Olympic Stadium
The Oval Cricket Ground
Twickenham Rugby Stadium









Theatres




London Coliseum
Haymarket Theatre
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe









Other




Brixton Academy
Earls Court Exhibition Centre
Hammersmith Apollo
The O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena
ExCeL
Alexandra Palace












Government




10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
The National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building









Museums and
galleries




British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum









Places of worship




BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall Westminster
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral









Retailing






Shops




Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges









Shopping centres
and markets




Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City












Royal buildings






Partly occupied by Royal Family




Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace









Unoccupied




Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Kew Palace












Skyscrapers




8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
One Canada Square
St George Wharf Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
Strata SE1
Tower 42









Structures




Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Thames Barrier









Transport




Emirates Air Line
Heathrow Airport
King's Cross railway station
Liverpool Street station
Marylebone station
Paddington station
St Pancras railway station
Waterloo station









Other




Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House











Parks





Royal Parks




Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park









Other




Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common











Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Trafalgar Square








Streets



Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
Oxford Street
The Mall
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Strand
Thames Street
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall









Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics














v
t
e


Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Opera Production (2001–2025)









The Greek Passion – Royal Opera, London (2001)
Boulevard Solitude – Royal Opera, London (2002)
Wozzeck – Royal Opera, London (2003)
The Trojans: Parts I and II – English National Opera (2004)
Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District – Royal Opera, London (2005)
Madama Butterfly – English National Opera (2006)
Jenůfa – English National Opera (2007)
Pelléas and Mélisande – Royal Opera, London (2008)
Partenope - English National Opera (2009)
Tristan und Isolde - Royal Opera, London (2010)
Bohème - Soho Theatre (2011)
Castor and Pollux – Coliseum Theatre (2012)
Einstein on the Beach – Barbican Theatre (2013)
Les vêpres siciliennes – The Royal Opera (2014)
The Mastersingers of Nuremberg – English National Opera (2015)












Complete list
(1993–2000)
(2001–2025)












 
						