From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search






History


United States


Namesake:
Jeff Davis Woodson


Builder:
Consolidated Steel Corporation, Orange, Texas


Laid down:
7 March 1944


Launched:
29 April 1944


Commissioned:
24 August 1944


Decommissioned:
15 January 1947


Commissioned:
19 May 1951


Decommissioned:
11 August 1962


In service:
16 May 1959


Struck:
1 July 1965


Fate:
sold for scrap, 16 August 1966


General characteristics


Class & type:
John C. Butler-class destroyer escort


Displacement:
1,350 tons


Length:
306 ft (93 m)


Beam:
36 ft 8 in (11 m)


Draft:
9 ft 5 in (3 m)


Propulsion:
2 boilers, 2 geared turbine engines, 12,000 shp; 2 propellers


Speed:
24 knots (44 km/h)


Range:
6,000 nmi. (12,000 km) @ 12 kt


Complement:
14 officers, 201 enlisted


Armament:


2 × 5 in (127 mm)/38 guns (2×1)
4 × 40 mm AA guns (2×2)
10 × 20 mm AA guns (10×1)
3 × 21 in. torpedo tubes (1×3)
8 × depth charge projectors
1 × depth charge projector (hedgehog)
2 × depth charge tracks




USS Woodson (DE-359) was a John C. Butler-class destroyer escort acquired by the United States Navy during World War II. The primary purpose of the destroyer escort was to escort and protect ships in convoy, in addition to other tasks as assigned, such as patrol or radar picket.
Woodson was named in honor of Jeff Davis Woodson, who was awarded the Navy Cross posthumously for his valiant effort during the Battle of Midway. She was laid down on 7 March 1944 at Orange, Texas, by the Consolidated Steel Corp., Ltd.; launched on 29 April 1944; sponsored by Mrs. Joyce M. Woodson; and commissioned on 24 August 1944, Lt. Comdr. J. L. Foley in command.



Contents


1 World War II North Atlantic operations
2 Transferred to the Pacific Fleet
3 End-of-war activity
4 Stateside-based operations
5 Hunter-killer operations
6 First Mediterranean cruise
7 Training Naval Reservists
8 Final decommissioning
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



World War II North Atlantic operations[edit]
After fitting out at Galveston, Texas, the destroyer escort embarked upon her shakedown cruise on 11 September. En route to her training area in the vicinity of Bermuda, she assisted the survivors of USS Warrington (DD-383) which had sunk off the U.S. East Coast during a hurricane. Woodson rescued a number of survivors, carried them to Norfolk, Virginia, and then resumed shakedown training around Bermuda. The warship completed that training and arrived in Boston, Massachusetts, on 25 October. After two weeks of post-shakedown availability, she stood out of Boston on 6 November, bound for Norfolk where she spent the remainder of the month serving as a school ship for the Operational Training Command, Atlantic Fleet.
Transferred to the Pacific Fleet[edit]
On the last day of November, she departed Norfolk and shaped a course for the Pacific Ocean and duty with the U.S. 7th Fleet in the southwestern Pacific Ocean. Steaming via the Panama Canal, the Galápagos Islands, and Bora Bora in the Society Islands, she arrived at Hollandia on the northern coast of New Guinea on 3 January 1945. Upon her arrival, the destroyer escort was assigned to convoy duty between New Guinea and the Philippines, primarily on the Hollandia-to-Leyte run. Early in April, however, she dropped her runs to New Guinea and limited her operations to escort missions among major ports in the Philippines such as Leyte, Lingayen Gulf, and Manila Bay. That duty lasted until 25 May when she reported to the Commander, Task Group (TG) 71.5 at Subic Bay for duty escorting submarines to and from their war patrol release points. When not engaged in her primary duty, Woodson participated in post-refit exercises with submarines and conducted antisubmarine patrols. Such activities occupied her through the end of hostilities and until the end of August.
End-of-war activity[edit]
On the 31st, she was detached from task group TG 71.5 and departed Subic Bay, bound for the Ryukyus. At Okinawa on 4 September, she became an element of task group TG 70.3, the escort group for the occupation forces headed for northern China and Korea. On 5 October, she left Okinawa and steamed to Shanghai where she arrived late the following day. She next returned to Leyte and remained there until 22 October when she headed back to Okinawa where she joined another China occupation convoy which sailed in early November. At Hong Kong at mid-month, the destroyer escort departed again on the 21st and shaped a course for Okinawa where she arrived on 24 November. Two days later, she began her voyage home.
Stateside-based operations[edit]
Stopping at Pearl Harbor en route, Woodson arrived in San Pedro, California, on 16 December to begin inactivation overhaul. On 16 May 1946, she was placed in commission, in reserve, and remained so until 15 January 1947 at which time she was decommissioned. Except for a brief period during the winter of 1948 and 1949 when she made a round-trip run under tow to Long Beach, California, for an overhaul, she remained at San Diego, California, until the spring of 1951. On 19 May 1951, Woodson was recommissioned at San Diego, Lt. Comdr. A. Dennett in command.
The warship spent most of the summer of 1951 conducting shakedown training and other local operations along the coast of southern California. On 4 September, she got underway from San Diego on her way to the east coast. Steaming via the Panama Canal, Woodson arrived in Newport, Rhode Island, in mid-September and began local operations. On 19 October, the warship departed the Newport area to participate in the annual Atlantic Fleet exercises held in the vicinity of Puerto Rico. She returned to Newport on 17 November and remained there through the end of the year.
On 16 January 1952, the destroyer escort headed for Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where she arrived two days later. There, she began a three-month overhaul at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard. Woodson completed repairs on 22 April and headed back to Newport but under tow given by USS Atakapa (YTB-49).
She reentered Newport on 25 April but remained there less than two weeks, departing again on 7 May. She reached Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, four days later and began six weeks of refresher training. The destroyer escort completed that assignment on 20 June and set course—via Ciudad Trujillo, Dominican Republic—for Newport. The warship reentered her home port on 28 June. Two days later, she became an element of the newly formed Hunter-Killer Group, Atlantic Fleet, under the overall command of Rear Admiral Daniel V. Gallery, the captor of U-505 during World War II.
Hunter-killer operations[edit]
For the next five years, Woodson ranged the length of the Atlantic coast of the United States from Newport in the north to Cuba and the West Indies in the south. Her activities consisted mostly of type training and independent ship's exercises. Frequently, however, she served as target ship for submarines engaged in training and as school ship for the Fleet Sonar School located at Key West, Florida. Fleet exercises, special projects, and periodic overhauls also added further variety to her schedule of operations. During June 1957, she also participated in the International Fleet Review held at Norfolk. That same month, her home port was changed from Newport, Rhode Island, to Key West, Florida. Summer brought a midshipman cruise down the St. Lawrence River to Quebec, Canada, and thence back to Boston and finally to Norfolk. On 16 August, she finally entered her new home port for the first time since her reassignment.
First Mediterranean cruise[edit]
Her stay there proved brief for, on 30 August, she embarked upon her first voyage to the Mediterranean in company with Escort Squadron 1 (CortRon) 12. She arrived at Naples, Italy, on 14 September and, soon thereafter, began a full round of NATO exercises, highlighted by amphibious assault training at Souda Bay, Crete. At the conclusion of her Mediterranean assignment on 6 November, she departed Gibraltar and headed via the Azores to Key West. Upon her arrival in Key West on 20 November, Woodson saw CortRon 12 broken up and parceled out ship by ship to various ports to support the training of Naval Reserve units.
Training Naval Reservists[edit]
She got underway on 2 December; headed for her own new home port, New Orleans, Louisiana; and arrived there two days later. For the remainder of her active career, Woodson cruised the waters of the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies training New Orleans-based naval reservists. On 16 May 1959, her status was reduced from in commission to in service, though her mission, Naval Reserve training, remained the same. She helped naval reservists to polish their skills both at dockside at New Orleans and underway in the Gulf of Mexico until 11 August 1962 when she was placed in reserve.
Final decommissioning[edit]
Following inspection and survey in June 1965, her name was struck from the Navy List on 1 July 1965. She was sold for scrapping to the Boston Metals Co., of Baltimore, Maryland, on 16 August 1966.
See also[edit]

List of United States Navy ships
Destroyer
Destroyer escort

References[edit]

This article incorporates text from the public domain Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. The entry can be found here.

External links[edit]

NavSource Online: Destroyer Escort Photo Archive - USS Woodson (DE-359)









v
t
e


John C. Butler-class destroyer escorts







 United States Navy






Completed




John C. Butler
O'Flaherty
Raymond
Richard W. Suesens
Abercrombie
Oberrender
Robert Brazier
Edwin A. Howard
Jesse Rutherford
Key
Gentry
Traw
Maurice J. Manuel
Naifeh
Doyle C. Barnes
Kenneth M. Willett
Jaccard
Lloyd E. Acree
George E. Davis
Mack
Woodson
Johnnie Hutchins
Walton
Rolf
Pratt
Rombach
McGinty
Alvin C. Cockrell
French
Cecil J. Doyle
Thaddeus Parker
John L. Williamson
Presley
Williams
Richard S. Bull
Richard M. Rowell
Eversole
Dennis
Edmonds
Shelton
Straus
La Prade
Jack Miller
Stafford
Walter C. Wann
Samuel B. Roberts
Le Ray Wilson
Lawrence C. Taylor
Melvin R. Nawman
Oliver Mitchell
Tabberer
Robert F. Keller
Leland E. Thomas
Chester T. O'Brien
Douglas A. Munro
Dufilho
Haas
Corbesier
Conklin
McCoy Reynolds
William Seiverling
Ulvert M. Moore
Kendall C. Campbell
Goss
Grady
Charles E. Brannon
Albert T. Harris
Cross
Hanna
Joseph E. Connolly
Donaldson / Gilligan
Formoe
Heyliger
Edward H. Allen
Tweedy
Howard F. Clark
Silverstein
Lewis
Bivin
Rizzi
Osberg
Wagner
Vandivier









Canceled




William C. Lawe
Lloyd Thomas
Keppler
Kleinsmith
Henry W. Tucker
Weiss
Francovich
DE-380 (Unnamed)
DE-381 (Unnamed)
DE-425 — DE-437 (Unnamed)
Woodrow R. Thompson
Steinaker
DE-453 — DE-507 (Unnamed)
DE-511 — DE-515 (Unnamed)
Sheehan
Oswald A. Powers
Groves
Alfred Wolf
Harold J. Ellison
Myles C. Fox
Charles R. Ware
Carpellotti
Eugene A. Greene
Gyatt
Benner
Kenneth D. Bailey
Dennis J. Buckley
Everett F. Larson
Rogers Blood
William R. Rush
William M. Wood
DE-558 — DE-562 (Unnamed)












 Portuguese Navy




Diogo-Cão (ex-Formoe)
Corte Real (ex-McCoy Reynolds)











Preceded by: Rudderow class
Followed by: Dealey class











List of destroyer escorts of the United States Navy











 
						