From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search





Börsenstraße 2–4, former building of the Frankfurt Oberjustizkasse


A Landesjustizkasse (lit., "state justice treasury"), Oberjustizkasse (lit., "higher justice treasury") or simply Justizkasse (lit., "justice treasury") is a financial institution within the German judicial system traditionally attached to an Oberlandesgericht (higher state court). Some German states have more than one Oberlandesgericht, but now only one Landesjustizkasse. In some other states the Justizkasse has been merged into a central state treasury.
A Landesjustizkasse or Oberjustizkasse is the central enforcement authority for claims of the state within its jurisdiction area (commonly the entire state), is responsible for the accounting of the judicial authorities in the area, clearing transactions with institutions within the judicial system, court costs, cash deposits of the lower courts, and other tasks. It thus partially functions as an internal bank for the judiciary.[1]
Today, the head of a Landesjustizkasse or Oberjustizkasse typically holds the civil service rank Regierungsdirektor (government director) or Leitender Regierungsdirektor (senior government director).[2] According to the states' regulations about the representation of the state (Vertretungsordnung), the head of a Landesjustizkasse or Oberjustizkasse is one of the direct representatives of the state in the judicial field, together with the Minister of Justice, the attorney general and the President of the Correctional Service.
The older designation Oberjustizkasse has largely been replaced with Landesjustizkasse. Some German states with more than one Oberjustizkasse have centralized them into one Landesjustizkasse, while other states have merged the Justizkasse into a central state treasury with broader responsibilities than the judicial system. Today, only the Oberjustizkasse in Hamm, with over 160 employees, is still known as an Oberjustizkasse. The still existing Oberjustizkasse or Landesjustizkasse institutions today typically handle claims of around one billion euro annually.
References[edit]


^ "Aderlass noch zu verhindern? Größerer Stellenabbau bei Oberjustizkasse am OLG Hamm scheint vermeidbar." In: Westfälischer Anzeiger, 21 December 2011, Hamm, p. 16
^ Manfred Stapelmann ist in den Ruhestand getreten, olg-hamm.nrw.de





 
						