From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012)



University of Rajasthan

राजस्थान विश्वविद्यालय





Motto
धर्मो विश्वस्य जगतः प्रतिस्था (Dharmo Vishwasya Jagatah Pratishtha)


Type
Public


Established
1948


Chancellor
Kalyan singh


Location
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India


Campus
Urban


Affiliations
UGC,[1] AIU[2]


Website
http://www.uniraj.ac.in


University of Rajasthan (Hindi: राजस्थान विश्वविद्यालय) is a public and state university and one of the oldest university in the Indian state Rajasthan, located in the city Jaipur. It was set up on 8 January 1947 as the University of Rajputana and was given its current name in the year 1956.[3]



Contents


1 Introduction

1.1 Pre-independence history[4]
1.2 Post-independence history


2 Faculties and departments

2.1 Faculty of Arts
2.2 Faculty of Science
2.3 Faculty of Commerce
2.4 Faculty of Education
2.5 Faculty of Fine Arts
2.6 Faculty of Law
2.7 Faculty of Management
2.8 Faculty of Social Sciences
2.9 Faculty of Technology
2.10 Faculty of Business Administration
2.11 Interdisciplinary programmes


3 Residential student halls
4 University library and centers
5 Constituent Colleges
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Introduction[edit]
Pre-independence history[4][edit]





Jaipur




Campus Location in India: Jaipur






Entrance gate of Rajasthan University


Consideration for a separate University for Rajputana State commenced in 1921 when the Act for the Allahabad University was passed. The Act prescribed for separation of Intermediate classes from the Degree classes as a condition for affiliation, which meant more expenditure for the then colleges at Jaipur, Jodhpur and Ajmer, the only colleges then imparting University education and affiliated to Allahabad University. The location of the University became a controversial issue. The question was considered in all its aspects at a meeting called by the Agent to the Governor General in Rajputana and attended by the ruling Princes and Chiefs at Mt. Abu on 20- June 1924. It was finally decided that 'the general sense of the Conference seems to be that there are strong obstacles at present to a Rajputana University, and that the scheme is premature but that the respective advantages of affiliating either with Agra or with Delhi under changed conditions as can be brought about should be explored.' The colleges in Rajasthan (erstwhile Rajputana ) were then affiliated to Agra University after it was established in 1927. After a gap of nearly two decades the efforts were again initiated in 1942 by Sir Mirza Ismail, the then Prime Minister of Jaipur, who appointed J.C. Rollo as Special Education Officer for this purpose. Sir Mirza Ismail and his successor in office Sir V.T. Krishnamachari, took the initiative of holding talks with the representatives of Udaipur, Jodhpur, Bikaner, Aiwar and Jaipur in December, 1946. They agreed to the establishment of a University at Jaipur and on 8- January, 1947, legislation was promulgated and the colleges in the State formally federated into the University of Rajputana , which came into existence in July the same year. It was the last (21st) university that was set up in pre- independent India.
The University office was temporarily set up in the Kesargarh Fort. The then Maharaja of Jaipur State, Sawai Man Singh graciously made available to the university an extensive site of over 300 acres. About two miles from the centre of the city, the site was considered ideal for a University campus. With the Moti Doongari castle overlooking the campus on the northern side, and the Jhalana hills stretching from end to end in the east, the site possessed that wild grandeur that characterised most landmarks of Rajasthan.
Dr. G. S. Mahajani, who was at that time Principal of Ferguson College, Poona (now Pune) was appointed the first Vice-Chancellor of the University. Shri M. M. Verma was appointed the first Registrar, who worked very closely with Dr. Mahajani.
The University was granted an annual grant of Rs.2.5 lacs by the participating States of Rajputana . What is remarkable is that the States made it clear that the "acceptance of the grant will in no way detract from the autonomy of the University and its freedom to organise its teaching and administration as to embody in them the highest conception of University life." The University has made a significant contribution in the field of higher education. The university has demonstrated a progressive and dynamic outlook since its very beginning. The foundations laid for this University are deep and strong as is amply borne out by the following extract from the address delivered by Shri J. C. Rollo, on the 28- July 1947 at the meeting of the Academic Council. "This is the first meeting of academic council of the University. It is of happy significance that the first body to meet should be the Academic Council. It helps to emphasize the fact that this University is to be one in which academic considerations, academic responsibility, shall always come first. This Council is the academic conscience of the University; and, as the first person honoured with its Chairmanship, I venture to suggest that today and always the members may firmly maintain, at whatever cost, the highest standards and the soundest policy from an academic point of view. Finally, might I respectfully ask that from the beginning every member may exercise a free and independent personal judgment and may never accept the dictation of any group of persons; a habit that has proved ruinous to some Universities. In the University of Raj putana independence will not be dangerous."
Post-independence history[edit]
The University Motto, "Dharmo Vishwasya Jagatah Pratishtha" suggested by the Vice-Chancellor, Dr. G. S. Mahajani was accepted by the Executive Council at its meeting held on 28- January, 1948. "This enshrines the greatest contribution India has made to world thought: and it is our earnest hope that Universities in India will assist in the rediscovery of spiritual values which the world needs at the present time." In February, 1949, Shri V. T. Krishnamachari, the Diwan of the Jaipur State and Pro Vice Chancellor of the University said in his welcome speech, "The University has now been in existence for over 1-1/2 years and its progress during this period has been gratifying. For this the credit goes to Dr. Mahajani and those who work with him. The University bodies have settled down to their work and the University has begun to conduct all its examinations and has also obtained recognition for its degrees." We are trying for the establishment of an Engineering College in Jodhpur and Agricultural College in Bikaner.
Shri C. Rajagopalachari, the first Governor General of free India, had a very clear idea of the importance of the universities and their dignity. Speaking to the students of Loyala College, Madras in August 1948, he had observed "we have to maintain the highest standards for our universities. The pressure of democracy may be allowed to bear on anything else, but not on the standard of education. Do not compel the universities to come down to you. You must go up the steps to reach the universities."
The foundation stone of the University Campus was laid by Shri C. Rajagopalachari on Sunday, the February 20, 1949. He concluded his address on the occasion with these words, "Nothing can be achieved unless we learn to be good and correct and self-disciplined and cultivate self-restraint and that, which is called dharma in our beautiful language. " The motto of the University calls upon the faculty and the students to spread this Dharma throughout the world, to make the planet earth a better place to live. Dharma is the stabilising factor for the whole world and if this new university which will, in the history that will be written, be associated with free India, truly a Rajputana University, is built on that foundation according to its motto, nothing will prevent India from becoming great. I invoke blessings of God on this new foundation. " The jurisdiction of this University at that time extended over the entire Rajputana State with the exception of Ajmer-Merwara. In the beginning, it was only an affiliating University with twenty-two colleges in different parts of the state and it also controlled High School and Intermediate Education. After the merger of Ajmer-Merwara with the State of Rajasthan in 1956 this region also came under the jurisdiction of the University of Rajputana, which was named as University of Rajasthan in 1957. With the establishment of a Board of Secondary Education in the State in 1957 the schools were transferred to this board and the University could then concentrate on development of higher education and research. The University of Rajasthan subsequently became a teaching-cum-affiliating University. The University owes much to the foresight, ability and sincerity of the first three Vice-Chancellors of the University viz. Dr. G.S. Mahajani, Dr. G.C. Chatterji and Dr. Mohan Sinha Mehta, who played a crucial role in the development of the University, its campus, recruitment of faculty and in laying down sound traditions. Each of the three distinguished and highly dignified Vice-Chancellors served the University for two successive terms, thus, guiding the destiny of the University for the first eighteen years, which was the formative period of the University. To them the University owes the image it came to acquire in the minds of the intellectual community of India. They brought in different faculties, some of the finest scholars who after having served in the University for many years, took up high positions at the national level. The names of Prof. M. V. Mathur, Prof. G. C. Pandey, Prof. Raj Krishna, Prof. Daya Krishna, Miss A. G. Stock, Prof. P. N. Srivastava, Prof. R. C. Mehrotra, Dr. S. Bashiruddin, Prof. Satish Chandra, Prof. S. P. Verma, Prof. Iqbal Narain, Prof. R. K. Kaul, Prof. Raja Chelliah, Prof. T.K.N. Unnithan are just a few names who brought glory and renown to the University.
Faculties and departments[edit]
The university has the following faculties and departments:
Faculty of Arts[edit]




Department of Sanskrit



Department of English
Department of European Languages, Literature and Culture Studies
Department of Hindi
Department of Philosophy
Department of Sanskrit
Department of Urdu and Persian

Faculty of Science[edit]

Department of Botany
Department of Chemistry
Department of Geography
Department of Geology
Department of Home Science
Department of Mathematics
Department of Physics
Department of Psychology
Department of Statistics
Department of Zoology

Faculty of Commerce[edit]

Department of Accountancy and Business Statistics
Department of Business Administration
Department of Economic Administration and Financial Management

Faculty of Education[edit]

Department of Education
Department of Library & Information Science
Department of Physical Education

Faculty of Fine Arts[edit]

Department of Dramatics
Department of Drawing and Painting
Department of Music
Department of Visual Arts

Faculty of Law[edit]

Department of Law
Department of Criminology & Justice
University Five Year Law College
University law college (morning)
University law college center II (evening)

UK
Faculty of Management[edit]

R. A. Poddar Institute of Management

Faculty of Social Sciences[edit]

Department of Anthropology
Department of Economics
Department of History & Indian Culture
Department of Political Science
Department of Public Administration
Department of Sociology

Faculty of Technology[edit]

Department of Computer Science & Technology
Mechanics
Neuroscience
Nanotechnology
Biotechnology & Bioinformatics
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Environmental Technology Management
Food and Nutrition Technology
Information & Communication Technology (ICT)
Transportation Management Engineering

Faculty of Business Administration[edit]

Masters of Commerce in Business Administration
Masters of Human Resource Management
Masters of International Business
Masters of Information Management
Executive MBA & Ph.D.
Post Graduate Diploma in marketing (one year)

Interdisciplinary programmes[edit]

Department of Construction Management
Department of Development Studies
Department of Project Management
Department of Public Health Science
Department of Urban & Rural Development Studies

Residential student halls[edit]
This university has 16 student halls, a modern sports complex, and a large modern swimming pool with professional coaching.
University library and centers[edit]
See University of Rajasthan Library

Centre for European Studies
Centre for Jain Studies
Centre for Jyotirvigyan
University Centre for Computer Science and Information Technology
Centre for Development of Physics Education
Centre for Non Conventional Energy Resources
Centre for Water Management & Research
Indira Gandhi Centre for Human Ecology, Environment & Population Studies
Center for Converging Technologies(CCT)
Centre for Ambedker Studies
Centre for Buddhist Studies
Centre for Gandhian Studies
Centre for the Study of Local Self Government
Centre for Mass Communication
Centre for Museology & Conservation
Centre for Nehru Studies
Centre for Rajasthan Studies
Centre for the Study of Social Exclusion & Inclusion Policy
Center For Women Studies
Social Science Research Centre
South Asia Study Centre

Constituent Colleges[edit]

University Commerce College
University Maharani College
University Maharaja College
University Five Year Law College
University Law College
University Law College CENTRE-II
University Rajasthan College

See also[edit]

Central University of Rajasthan
Vardhaman Mahaveer Open University
Rajasthan Technical University
Jai Narain Vyas University
Maharaja Ganga Singh University

References[edit]


^ "State University Directory, University Grants Commission, India". ugc.ac.in. Retrieved 2014-09-18. 
^ "Association of Indian Universities member list". aiuweb.org. Retrieved 2014-09-18. 
^ "University of Rajasthan: An Overview". Retrieved 30 June 2014. 
^ http://www.uniraj.ac.in/index.php?mid=1101 University of Rajasthan History


External links[edit]

Official website


{Rajasthan Patwari Recruitment|http://www.onlinedairy.in/2014/11/rajasthan-patwari-recruitment-online.html}










v
t
e


Universities in Rajasthan






Ajmer



Bhagwant University
Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University








Alwar



Raffles University








Bikaner



Rajasthan Agricultural University
University of Bikaner








Jaipur



Dr. K.N.Modi University
Jaipur National University
JECRC University
LNM Institute of Information Technology
Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur
NIMS University
Rajasthan Sanskrit University
Rajasthan University of Health Sciences
Pratap University
Poornima University
Suresh Gyan Vihar University
University of Rajasthan








Jodhpur



Jai Narain Vyas University
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Jodhpur National University
Lachoo Memorial College
National Law University, Jodhpur
Rajasthan Ayurved University








Kota



Rajasthan Technical University
University of Kota
Vardhaman Mahaveer Open University








Pilani



Birla Institute of Technology and Science








Udaipur



Mohanlal Sukhadia University
Geetanjali University
Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture and Technology
Pacific University
Sir Padampat Singhania University
Rajasthan Vidyapeeth University








Other Cities



Institute of Advanced Studies in Education
Jain Vishva Bharati University
Jayoti Vidyapeeth Women's University
Banasthali Vidyapith
Madhav University
Mody Institute of Technology and Science
OPJS University
Tantia University
















v
t
e


Education in India







Ministry of Human Resource Development






Education by states



Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chandigarh
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal












 
Education in Indian cities









Bangalore
Bareilly
Chennai
Coimbatore
Cuddalore
Dharmapuri
Dharwad
Erode
Gobichettipalayam
Hyderabad
Indore
Jhansi
Kollam
Kozhikode
Krishnagiri
Lucknow
Madurai
Meerut
Nagpur
Namakkal
Patna
Perambalur
Pudukkottai
Rourkela
Salem
Thalassery
Tiruchirappalli
Thanjavur















 
Higher education in India







Regulating organisations




Department of Higher Education
University Grants Commission
National Assessment and Accreditation Council
National Board of Accreditation









Professional councils




All India Council for Technical Education
Bar Council of India
Central Council of Homoeopathy
Central Council of Indian Medicine
Dental Council of India
Distance Education Council
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Indian Nursing Council
Medical Council of India
National Council for Teacher Education
Pharmacy Council of India
Rehabilitation Council of India









Institutions
(list)






Universities (list)




Central
State
Deemed
Private
Other autonomous









Institutions by type




Agriculture
Architecture
Business
Dentistry
Engineering
Forestry
Islamic
Law
Medicine
Nursing
Pharmacy
Teaching
Veterinary









Institutions by state




Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chandigarh
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal


















 
School education in India







Boards of
education
(list)






National




Central Board of Secondary Education
Central Tibetan School Administration
Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations
National Institute of Open Schooling









State




Andhra Pradesh (Secondary
Intermediate)
Assam (Secondary
Higher Secondary)
Bihar (School
Intermediate)
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
Karnataka (Secondary
Pre-University)
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur (Secondary
Higher Secondary)
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha (Secondary
Higher Secondary)
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu (Secondary
Higher Secondary)
Telangana (Secondary
Intermediate)
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal (Primary
Secondary
Higher Secondary
Open
Vocational
Madrasah)












Schools
(list)
(category)






By location




Bangalore
Bikaner
Chennai
Gurgaon
Hisar
Hyderabad
Jaipur
Jamshedpur
Kalyan
Kanpur
Kolkata
Kollam
Kota
Lucknow
Mumbai
Nilgiris
Ooty
Patna
Pune
Ranchi
Rourkela
Shillong
Tiruchirappalli
Thiruvananthapuram
Udaipur
Vatakara









By type




Railway Schools (list)
DAV Public School (list)
Ramakrishna Mission (list)
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (list)
Bal Bharati Public School (list)
Delhi Public School (list)
Saraswati Shishu Mandir (list)
Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan (list)
Sainik School (list)
Kendriya Vidyalaya (list)
Chinmaya Vidyalayas (list)
Atomic Energy Central School (list)
Vivekananda Vidyalaya (list)
Ryan International Schools (list)
Indian Army Public Schools (list)
Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (list)
Waldorf Schools (India) (list)
List of boarding schools
List of international schools









By state




Maharashtra
Rajasthan












Other
topics




All India Secondary School Examination
Board examination
Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation
Higher Secondary Examination
Literacy in India
Midday Meal Scheme
National Council of Educational Research and Training
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan
Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan














 Templates
 Portal
 Category
 WikiProject











 
						