From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search









This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve this article to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. The talk page may contain suggestions. (January 2016)







This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016)







This article is an orphan, as no other articles link to it. Please introduce links to this page from related articles; try the Find link tool for suggestions. (January 2016)









B4X

Developer(s)
Anywhere Software | Erel Uziel


Operating system
Microsoft Windows


Available in
English


Type
Programming


License
Proprietary software (Commercial software or shareware)


Website
www.b4x.com


B4X is a suite of rapid application development IDEs that target Google Android, Apple iOS, and the Java platform. The suite uses a Proprietary dialect of Visual Basic (hereinafter called "B4X") and allows users to easily share code between the IDEs. The suite also features a visual designer that simplifies the process of creating user interfaces.



Contents


1 B4A (Formerly Basic4android)
2 B4J
3 B4i
4 Code Example

4.1 Code Comments
4.2 Generating a Random Number, then displaying the number.


5 Archived IDEs

5.1 Basic4ppc


6 References



B4A (Formerly Basic4android)[edit]
B4A, formerly known as Basic4android, is the second IDE produced by Anywhere Software. The first public version was released on December 7, 2010 and allows users to code native Android apps in B4X. B4A is able to create apps, widgets, and games. There is also a beginners guide that is updated after each new release of the IDE.[1]
Latest Public Release: 5.5, November 2015.
B4J[edit]
B4J is the third IDE produced by Anywhere Software. The first public version was released on December 4, 2013. B4J Allows users to target Desktop platforms, Web servers, and ARM Boards such as Raspberry Pi.
Latest Release: 4.01; December 30, 2015.
B4i[edit]
B4i is the fourth IDE produced by Anywhere Software. The first public version was released on November 14, 2014. B4i allows users to code iOS (iPhone/iPad) apps using B4X.
Latest Release: 2.30; October 18, 2015.
Code Example[edit]
Code Comments[edit]


'This is a comment

Generating a Random Number, then displaying the number.[edit]
The following code can be shared between B4A and B4i with no changing:


Sub Button1_Clicked
DisplayRandom 'Calls the Sub named "DisplayRandom". Note that you have to have a Sub already created in order to call it. If you don't, then the compiler will throw a "Undeclared Variable" error.
End Sub
Sub DisplayRandom
Dim Random As Int
Random = Rnd(1, 10)
MsgBox(Random, "Your Number")
End Sub

In a B4J UI app, you'll need to replace the MsgBox function with the following:


fx.MsgBox(FormTitle, Random, "Your Number")

Note that you can only use the [fx.MsgBox] method in B4J 4.00 and above.
Archived IDEs[edit]
Basic4ppc[edit]
Basic4ppc (pronounced "Basic for PPC") is a programming language for Pocket PC handheld computers running Windows Mobile operating system, by Anywhere Software. The language is based on a BASIC-like syntax, taking advantage of Microsoft’s .NET technology, to allow additional libraries, graphical user interface design of windows forms, rapid application development (RAD), and .NET framework compatible compilation. The language implements a unique way of adding objects to a program without being object-oriented. Its advantages are simplicity, development pace and the integration with .NET framework. A special version of the integrated development environment (IDE) allows developing straight onto the Windows Mobile device. With the demise of Windows Mobile operating system and the devices running it Basic4PPC came to the end of its life in 2010, after the first release. For owners of Basic4PPC it remains a useful Windows-desktop BASIC compiler as it runs code directly in the Windows environment and it can compile a project to a Windows 'exe' file for use as a Windows program.
The last stable release was in 2010 and its version was 6.9. It is no longer available for purchase.








v
t
e


Major fields of computer science







Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing classification.






Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation








Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability








Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service








Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality








Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository








Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model








Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics








Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry








Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis








Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval








Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security








Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility








Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing








Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence








Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Machine learning algorithms
Cross-validation








Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling








Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management











 Computer science portal








References[edit]


^ "Android Tutorial - B4A Beginners Guide | B4X Community - Android, iOS, desktop, server and IoT programming tools". www.b4x.com. Retrieved 2016-01-17. 







This article has not been added to any categories. Please help out by adding categories to it so that it can be listed with similar articles. (January 2016)





 
						