From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2013)


Nazargunj (tr.: a place worth seeing) is an Indian princely state, originating in Purnea, in the state of Bihar. Nazargunj was the dominant princely state in the Purnea region, and as a result of geographical proximity, it included land in what is now Bengal.



Contents


1 Early history
2 The Raja of Nazargunj
3 Late history
4 The Raja's family
5 References



Early history[edit]
The Raja of Nazargunj, Prithi Chand Lal Chaudhuri, CBE, was born in 1886. He was the son of the Zamindar Dharam Chand Lall Chaudhuri; from whom he took control of the estate in March, 1899. The Raja was privately educated under the supervision of the Cambridge graduate, Rev. A. H. Manning. The Raja was a great admirer of Gandhi, both before, and additionally so after entertaining him in Purnea, in 1929.
The Raja of Nazargunj[edit]
The Raja considerably improved the area's infrastructure. He contributed more than half the cost of construction of the Sowra bridge, built schools and temples, and donated to the likes of the Lady Dufferin Hospital in Purnea. He was also head of Purnea Polo Club, an honorary magistrate on the Purnea Sudder independent bench, and a volunteer in the Northern Bengal Mounted Rifles. The first Indian member of The Calcutta Rackets Club, he also supported other sports clubs.[citation needed]
The Raja's family was well known for horse-racing in Calcutta, Darjeeling (1911), and Lucknow (1928). Some of the prestigious races won by their horses including The Calcutta Derby in the 1959–60 race, The Oaks, The 1000 Guineas and The Queen's Cup (Queen Elizabeth II). Other awards won were for flower and dog shows.
The Raja maintained lasting friendships with other Indian princely states, including Cooch Behar and Burdwan, and was popular with in the Bhutanese Dorji clan, who were hereditary Prime Ministers.
The Raja was said to allow different faiths equal opportunities to practice whatever they believed in, and to be a promoter of music: he retained Bismillah Khan (later known as Ustad Bismillah Khan Sahib) during the time of his eldest son's marriage (Kumar Vishnu Chand Lall, c. 1937) to play the shehnai. At that time, Khan was spotted by All India Radio, and was offered a contract. The Raja granted permission, and encouraged him to take up the opportunity.
Late history[edit]
After Indian independence, the Government of India actively pursued the integration of the princely states into the rest of the country, with the promise of compensation for the hereditary rulers. After integration, the Nazargunj estate was, in essentials, abandoned because of political instability and economic decline under the rule of Chief Minister of Bihar, Lalu Prasad Yadav.
The Raja's family[edit]
The Raja had three wives, remaining legally married to each of them.They had both sons and daughters. Kumar Vishnu Chand Lall of Nazargunj,Kumar Bhubneswari Chand Lall and also Victor Chand Lall were amongst the named males. Victor Chand Lall's son Peter lives in Australia he has two daughters one who is a champion pistol shooter both in Australia and the Bianci cup in the USA.
The remaining Hindu male line of Nazargunj resumed through Pradeep Chand Lall's three sons: Vikash Chand Lall who lives in Washington, D.C., Pavan Chand Lall (married to Semira Khaleeli), who lives in Mumbai, and Siddarth Chand Lall (married to Olivia Freeland), who lives in London. Pradeep Chand Lall of Nazargunj died in May, 2007, due to lung cancer.
Late Kumar Bhubneswari Chand Lall has one son and two daughters. Deepak Chand Lall who lives in (New Jersey) Meena Gupta (Mumbai) and Madhuri Jaiswal (Kolkata)
References[edit]

"Bengal and Assam Behar and Orissa, Their History, People, Commerce", and Industrial Resources, compiled by Somerset Playne, Edited by Arnold Wright, The Foreign & Colonial Compiling and Publishing Co, 27 Pilgrim Street, London (1917).





 
						