From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

Coordinates: 14°33′14″N 121°01′05″E﻿ / ﻿14.55387°N 121.01811°E﻿ / 14.55387; 121.01811


Washington Sycip Park



A sculpture by Impy Pilapil in the park.



Type
Urban park


Location
Legaspi Village, Makati,
 Philippines


Created
2006


Operated by
Ayala Land
Makati Commercial Estate Association


Status
Opened


Washington Sycip Park is a public park near Greenbelt mall in Legaspi Village, Makati, Metro Manila, Philippines. The park opened in 2006, and was named after Filipino accountant and banker Washington SyCip.[1] In addition to many indigenous tropical trees and plants, the park contains gazebos, benches with quotes by Sycip, sculptures and a koi pond.
The park is open daily from 06:00 to 22:00 PST (GMT+8). It is a no-smoking, no pet zone.[2]



Contents


1 Location
2 History
3 Activities and attractions

3.1 Art and architecture

3.1.1 Quotes


3.2 Flora
3.3 Fauna


4 Gallery
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Location[edit]
Washington SyCip Park is rectangular in form, bounded by Legaspi Street to the north, Gamboa Street to the south, Rada Street to the west, and the Corinthian Plaza parking lot to the east. It is close to Greenbelt shopping centre, the Asian Institute of Management, and Union Church of Manila.
History[edit]
Washington SyCip Park was created in 2006 by Ayala Land. The park was presented to Sycip in June 2006 (his 85th birthday), in recognition of his outstanding contributions to the Philippine business community.
The park was developed jointly by Ayala Land Incorporated, the Makati Commercial Estate Association (MACEA), the City of Makati, Barangay San Lorenzo, and Washington Sycip's Sycip Gorres Velayo & Co., the largest accounting and consulting firm in the Philippines.[3] The headquarters of MACEA is located in the northern edge of the park.
Activities and attractions[edit]

Birding: Many birds have been spotted in Washington Sycip Park, including pied fantails and yellow vented bulbuls.[4]
Koi Pond: Water bodies with orange koi fish can be found in the park, possibly a tribute to Washington's Chinese origins.
Gazebos: The park contains two gazebos, each with seating space.
Music: The park contains a public address system with hidden wires and soothing music playing on them. People also play the flute mornings and evenings.

Art and architecture[edit]
A number of sculptures by Filipino sculptor and artist Impy Pilapil can be found in the park.[5] These include:

Wishing Stone - a wishing stone, with a twig quill and water reservoir, which people can write their wishes on.
Faith - an obelisk-like white, stone sculpture with a pointed edge aiming for the heavens.
Entry - a Stonehenge-style gate made of white stone.
Sungka - a traditional Filipino board game played with shells.
The Mangrove Nature Embrace - a colourful framework, with blue as the dominant colour, made of steel pipes.[6]
Stone turtles: - a Chinese symbol of long life, stone turtles can be found at the northern and southern entrances to the park.
Giant urns: - giant stone urns flank one gateway of the park, probably a throwback to Sycip’s childhood years in Shanghai. In his biography, Sycip recounted that similar huge jars were found in his family garden and he used to peek at the fish swimming inside them.[7]

Quotes[edit]
Many park benches have quotes by its namesake posted on them.[8] Some of the quotes, which can be found on park benches and the walls of its gazebos, include:


“
Our country can be criticized for so many things, but in the end, we must give back what we can.
”




“
Take it from someone who has been through a world war, 14 Philippine presidents, and countless board meetings all over the world: nothing can ever replace the loyalty of a grateful client.
”




“
If there is one and only one message I would like you all to remember for the rest of your lives, it is this: be a person of integrity!
”


Flora[edit]
Washington SyCip Park is home to a number of trees including eucalyptus, rubber and calachuchi. 100 plants from the San Roque watershed were planted in the park as part of conservation efforts.


Bagras (Eucalyptus deglupta)
Calachuchi (Frangipani)
Mahogany
Fire tree (Delonix Regia)
Butterfly tree
Balete
Mango (Mangifera Indica)
Acacia (Samanea Saman)
Para rubber (Hevea brasiliensis)
Yellow bells Yellow trumpet bush (Tecoma stans)
Acacia (Samanea Saman) [9]
Narra (Pterocarpus indicus) - Tagalog Asana
Molave (Vitex parviflora)


Fauna[edit]

Eurasian tree sparrow (Passer montanus)
Philippine pied fantail (Rhipidura Nigritorquis)
Yellow-vented bulbul (Pycnonotus goiavier)

Gallery[edit]







A gazebo at the Washington Sycip Park









The Koi pond









A Balete tree at the park




See also[edit]

List of parks in Manila

References[edit]


^ A walk in Washington Sycip park, Blog
^ Ten Manila parks to visit|Ten Manila parks to visit, article.
^ A walk in Washington Sycip park, (2012) Blog post, Chit's blog
^ Blog, Birds and plants of Washington SyCip park, 2013
^ Official website, Washington Sycip Park, Impy Pilapil, 2013
^ Sculpture, The Mangrove Nature Embrace, 2013, Impy Pilapil
^ Dalisay, Jose (2009). Wash : Only a book keeper - A biography. Manila: The SGV Foundation and the AIM Scientific Research Foundation. 
^ In touch with nature, Blog, Republica Negrense, 2011
^ Stuart Exchange - Encyclopedia of Philippines Trees


External links[edit]

Impy Pilapil - Official Website
Birds and Plants of Washington Sycip Park - Blog
Photos of Washington SyCip park - Flickr









v
t
e


Parks and plazas in Metro Manila






Urban parks



Ayala Triangle Gardens
Marikina River Park
Mehan Garden
Paco Park
Pinaglabanan Shrine
Quezon Memorial Circle
Rizal Park











Nature parks



Arroceros Forest Park
Balara Filters Park
Freedom Island
Manila Zoological and Botanical Garden
Ninoy Aquino Parks and Wildlife Center
University of the Philippines Arboretum








Nature reserves



La Mesa Watershed Reservation








Squares and plazas



Liwasang Bonifacio
Plaza de Armas
Plaza Dilao
Plaza de España
Plaza Lacson
Plaza de Mexico
Plaza Miranda
Plaza Moraga
Plaza Moriones
Plaza Rajah Sulayman
Plaza de Roma
Plaza San Lorenzo Ruiz








Community parks



Valenzuela People's Park
Washington Sycip Park











 
						