From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search



Aakasa Ramanna



Poster



Directed by
G. Ashok


Produced by
Manyam Ramesh


Written by
Chandrashekar Gundimeda (dialogues)


Screenplay by
G. Ashok


Story by
G. Ashok


Starring
Allari Naresh
Sivaji
Rajiv Kanakala
Meera Jasmine
Gowri Pandit


Music by
Chakri


Cinematography
Sai Sriram


Edited by
Prawin Pudi



Production
company


Manyam Entertainments




Release dates




12 March 2010 (2010-03-12)









Country
India


Language
Telugu


Aakasa Ramanna (Telugu: ఆకాశ రామన్న) is a 2010 Telugu-language comedy film. It is a remake of a Hollywood movie by G. Ashok, produced by Manyam Ramesh under Manyam Entertainments banner and starring Allari Naresh, Sivaji, Rajiv Kanakala, Meera Jasmine, and Gowri Pandit. The film's soundtrack was composed by Chakri and Cinematography was handled by Sai Sriram. Dialogues for the film were written by Chandrashekar Gundimeda while Screenplay was handled also by G. Ashok. This was G. Ashok's second film as director. It marked the debut for editor Prawin Pudi. The film was released on 12 March 2010.



Contents


1 Plot
2 Cast
3 Production and casting
4 Release and reception
5 Soundtrack
6 References
7 External links



Plot[edit]
Akasa Ramanna, the narrator, starts with the story of Teja (Rajiv Kanakala), Raana (Allari Naresh) and Jai (Sivaji), The story also involves P. Thimothy (Venu Madhav) and his lecherous friends. Raana is in search of getting credit of five lakh rupess to help his girl friend Isha (Gowri Pandit). He seeks his friend and a supermarket owner Jai's help. Jai himself being in financial crisis cannot help Raana. He is arrested by police inspector (Rao Ramesh). Two murders happen to spice up the story. Rao Ramesh suspects Teja of the murders. Teja is introduced to the concept of the inescapable trap of 'karma' by a fake god-man Swamiji (Raghu Babu), in the local bar. In some minutes, the 'godman' is punished with death by 'karma,'. At the other end of the spectrum are, Raana and Jai, who are taken for a ride by a treacherous woman. Raana is in dire need of the money, while Jai mysteriously needs the same amount. Thimothy and gang are on their way to spend the night with their favourite whore. Meanwhile, Teja hits a person while driving the car in a drunken state. There is a terrible link between the two and the story rocks back and forth within a 40 minute duration leading to revealing the suspense. The entire film runs around just seven characters and is based on an incident that takes place at 12:40.
Cast[edit]

Allari Naresh as Raana
Sivaji as Jai
Rajiv Kanakala as Teja
Meera Jasmine as Tara
Gowri Pandit as Isha
Naga Babu as Isha's Father
Sana as Isha's Mother
Venu Madhav as P. Timothy
Srinivas Reddy as K.K.
Satyam Rajesh as Yadav
Rao Ramesh as Inspector Ali
Raghu Babu as Swamiji
Khayyum as Swamiji's Assistant 1
Venu as Swamiji's Assistant 2
Geetha Singh as Maggie
M. S. Narayana as Dr. Ekalingam
Banda Jyothi as Banda Jyothi

Production and casting[edit]
The lead actors in the film Allari Naresh and Sivaji had previously worked together in 2008 film Pelli Kaani Prasad. After his unsuccessful debut as director with the film Flash News, G. Ashok made his comeback with this film. This was Allari Naresh's third release in the year. Apart from Naresh and Sivaji, Rajiv Kanakala does another important role in the film. Meera Jasmine is cast for the role of Tara and Gowri Pandit for the role of Isha. The film revolves around seven main characters and the film features prominent Telugu actors like Venu Madhav, Khayyum, Venu and Srinivas Reddy. Chandrashekar assisted Ashok with the dialogues in the film. Before release, the director disclosed that the film was made with the ‘reverse screenplay’ technique meaning the climax is shown first and the film then follows. The entire film runs around just seven characters and is based on an incident that takes place at 12.40. Filming of the film began in October 2008 and was completed in mid-2009.[1] The film was delayed and was finally released on 12 March 2010. [2] Shooting was predominantly done at nights as the story happens within a time span of 40 minutes. The main plot of the film was taken from 2003 Canadian film 11:14.
Release and reception[edit]
Aakasa Ramanna was released in India on 12 March 2010. The film was received with negative reviews. Deepa Garimella of fullhyderbad gave a 3 out of 10 rating for the film.[3] Reviewer from Indiaglitz gave a mixed review for the film and said that Aakasa Ramanna is watchable but as a suspense flick the film fails.[4] Radhika Rajamani from rediff gave the film 1.5 out of 5 and said that Aakasa Ramanna falters in execution.[5] The film was a commercial failure at the box-office.
Soundtrack[edit]


Aakasa Ramanna


Soundtrack album by Chakri


Released
24 November 2010 (2010-11-24)


Genre
Film soundtrack


Producer
Chakri


The album consists of two songs, both written by popular lyricist Anantha Sreeram. The soundtrack was composed by music director Chakri.[6]


No.
Title
Lyrics
Artist(s)
Length


1.
"Yememi Kaavaali Maakippude"  
Anantha Sreeram
Sai Sivani
5:03


2.
"Ramanna Ramanna Aakasaramana"  
Anantha Sreeram
Vasu
4:28


References[edit]


^ "Aakasa Ramanna Title Announcement". idlebrain. Retrieved 16 January 2012. 
^ "Aakasa Ramanna on March 12". One India. Retrieved 16 January 2012. 
^ "akasaramanna Review". fullhyd Movies. Retrieved 9 January 2012. 
^ "AakasaRamanna Movie Review". Indiaglitz. Retrieved 16 January 2012. 
^ Rajamani, Radhika. "Aakasa Ramanna movie review". rediff. Retrieved 16 January 2012. 
^ "aakasa ramanna audio". raaga. Retrieved 10 January 2012. 


External links[edit]

Aakasa Ramanna at the Internet Movie Database




 
						