From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search



Knightsbridge 



Sloane Street entrance, 2004.










Knightsbridge





Location of Knightsbridge in Central London



Location
Knightsbridge


Local authority
Kensington & Chelsea


Managed by
London Underground


Number of platforms
2


Fare zone
1


London Underground annual entry and exit


2011
 20.70 million[1]


2012
 21.57 million[1]


2013
 21.47 million[1]


2014
 21.47 million[1]


Railway companies


Original company
Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway


Key dates


15 December 1906
Station opened


Other information


Lists of stations


DLR
Underground
National Rail
Tramlink




 London Transport portalCoordinates: 51°30′06″N 0°09′39″W﻿ / ﻿51.5017°N 0.1608°W﻿ / 51.5017; -0.1608


Knightsbridge is a London Underground station in Knightsbridge, London. It is on the Piccadilly line between South Kensington and Hyde Park Corner, and is in Travelcard Zone 1.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Reconstruction


2 In popular culture
3 Gallery
4 Connections
5 Notes
6 External links



History[edit]
The station was opened on 15 December 1906 by the Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway (GNP&BR, now the Piccadilly line). When opened, the platforms were accessed in the standard manner by four lifts and an emergency staircase connecting to parallel passageways and bridges to midway along the platforms. The original station building designed by Leslie Green was located on Brompton Road a short distance west of its junction with Knightsbridge and Sloane Street. A rear entrance was located on Basil Street.
The location of the station in a busy and fashionable shopping district meant that patronage at the station was high from the beginning, particularly due to the presence locally of the Harrods and Harvey Nichols emporiums. This contrasted with the next station on the line westward - Brompton Road, where passenger numbers were so low that from soon after its opening many trains were timetabled not to stop there.
Reconstruction[edit]
In the early 1930s, the availability of government grants to stimulate the depressed economy enabled the Underground Group to carry out a major modernisation programme, during which many central London stations were brought up to date with escalators to replace the original lifts. Knightsbridge was one of the Piccadilly line stations to benefit from the installation of escalators.
To enable the escalators to reach the existing platforms without excessive below ground reconstruction or interference with station operations a new ticket hall was constructed under the Brompton Road/Knightsbridge/Sloane Street junction and new circulation passages were constructed at the lower level. A new station entrance was inserted into the existing building on the corner of Brompton Road and Sloane Street Subway entrances on the other corners of the junction enabled pedestrians to avoid the traffic on the busy junction. The original entrances in Brompton Road and Basil Street were closed. The Brompton Road building was subsequently demolished, but the rear entrance at the corner of Basil Street and Hoopers Court remains, although converted for use as offices.
To ease congestion, it was also decided to provide an additional entrance to the western end of the platforms closer to Harrods. The additional exit would further diminish the passenger numbers at Brompton Road so this station was scheduled to close. A separate ticket hall was provided for the western escalators which is accessed by a long subway from the surface entrance at the corner of Hans Crescent. This narrow subway was to be a regular problem, often becoming congested with groups of passengers trying to pass each other in the confined space.
Eventually, in 2004, this congestion was solved by the expansion of this exit into a large circular area, under the road towards Harrods, with the way out of the station being by a stairway in the midst of the road.
The station recently underwent the first major refurbishment of the platforms since the reconstruction with the 1930s cream-coloured tiles being concealed behind a modern metal cladding system.
The residential development of One Hyde Park opposite the station features an entrance to the station which is the diverted closed off exit. It re-opened in December 2010.
In popular culture[edit]
The station appeared in a 1992 episode of Rumpole of the Bailey (Rumpole and the Children of the Devil), as Horace Rumpole and his wife Hilda travel there separately from Temple and Gloucester Road stations respectively. They exit Knightsbridge station from the stairs at the former street level portico on the corner of Hans Crescent and Brompton Road, which has since been redeveloped as the main entrance to a Zara fashion shop at 79 Brompton Road.
The opening scene of the 1997 film version of Henry James's The Wings of the Dove was set on the east-bound platforms at both Dover Street and Knightsbridge stations, both represented by the same studio mock-up, complete with a working recreation of a 1906 Stock train.
Gallery[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Knightsbridge tube station.









Westbound platform looking east









Eastbound platform looking west









Platform roundel




Connections[edit]
London Buses routes 9, 10, 14, 19, 22, 52, 74, 137, 414 and C1 and night routes N9, N19, N22, N74 and N137 serve the station.
Notes[edit]


^ a b c d "Multi-year station entry-and-exit figures" (XLS). London Underground station passenger usage data. Transport for London. June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 


External links[edit]

"Photographic Archive". London Transport Museum. Archived from the original on 2008-03-18. 

Original station building featuring non-standard decorative relief at high level, 1906
Basil Street entrance, 1925
Ticket hall, 1927
New station building, 1934. Compare elevation with current image which shows changes have been made to increase the width of the façade and to the first floor windows
New sub-surface ticket hall with ticket machines and top of escalators, 1934
Western ticket hall from end of sub-way with ticket machines, 1934
Sub-way to western ticket hall, 1934
Sub-way to western ticket hall, alternative view, 1934





Preceding station
 
 London Underground
 
Following station



South Kensington
towards Uxbridge or Heathrow Airport
(Terminal 4 or Terminal 5)


Piccadilly line


Hyde Park Corner
towards Cockfosters



 
Former Route
 


Preceding station
 
 London Underground
 
Following station



Brompton Road
towards Uxbridge or Hounslow West


Piccadilly line
1906-34



Hyde Park Corner
towards Cockfosters











v
t
e


Piccadilly line






Stations




Main route



Cockfosters
Oakwood
Southgate
Arnos Grove
Bounds Green
Wood Green
Turnpike Lane
Manor House
Finsbury Park 
Arsenal
Holloway Road
Caledonian Road
King's Cross St. Pancras 
Russell Square
Holborn
Covent Garden
Leicester Square
Piccadilly Circus
Green Park
Hyde Park Corner
Knightsbridge
South Kensington
Gloucester Road
Earl's Court
Barons Court
Hammersmith
Turnham Green
Acton Town








Heathrow branch



South Ealing
Boston Manor
Northfields
Osterley
Hounslow East
Hounslow Central
Hounslow West
Hatton Cross
Heathrow Terminal 4 
Heathrow Terminals 2 & 3 
Heathrow Terminal 5 








Uxbridge branch



Ealing Common
North Ealing
Park Royal
Alperton
Sudbury Town
Sudbury Hill
South Harrow
Rayners Lane
Eastcote
Ruislip Manor
Ruislip
Ickenham
Hillingdon
Uxbridge











Rolling stock




Present stock



1973 Stock











History




Former companies



Brompton & Piccadilly Circus Railway Railway
Great Northern, Piccadilly & Brompton Railway
Great Northern & Strand Railway
District Railway
Underground Electric Railways Company of London








Former stations



Aldwych
Brompton Road
Down Street
Osterley & Spring Grove
York Road








Former rolling stock



1906 Stock
1938 Stock
1956 Stock
1959 Stock
Standard Stock








Rejected plans



Angel
Aldgate
Alexandra Palace, Hornsey and Harringay
Goldhawk Road and Acton
Parsons Green
Shepherd's Bush
Waterloo














London Underground
Transport for London

 London Transport portal










 
						