From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search





Location of Mitchell County in Texas


This is a list of the National Register of Historic Places listings in Mitchell County, Texas.
This is intended to be a complete list of properties and districts listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Mitchell County, Texas. The locations of National Register properties and districts (at least for all showing latitude and longitude coordinates below) may be seen in a map by clicking on "Map of all coordinates".[1]
There is one property listed on the National Register in the county.


Map all coordinates using OSM
Map all coordinates using Google
Map up to 200 coordinates using Bing


Export all coordinates as KML


Export all coordinates as GeoRSS


Export all coordinates as GPX


Map all microformatted coordinates


Place data as RDF





This National Park Service list is complete through NPS recent listings posted February 12, 2016.[2]



Current listings[edit]


[3]
Name on the Register
Image
Date listed[4]
Location
City or town
Description


1
Scott-Majors House






000000001979-02-05-0000February 5, 1979
(#79002995)

425 Chestnut St.
32°23′27″N 100°51′52″W﻿ / ﻿32.390833°N 100.864444°W﻿ / 32.390833; -100.864444﻿ (Scott-Majors House)
Colorado City



See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Register of Historic Places in Mitchell County, Texas.



National Register of Historic Places listings in Texas

References[edit]


^ The latitude and longitude information provided in this table was derived originally from the National Register Information System, which has been found to be fairly accurate for about 99% of listings. For about 1% of NRIS original coordinates, experience has shown that one or both coordinates are typos or otherwise extremely far off; some corrections may have been made. A more subtle problem causes many locations to be off by up to 150 yards, depending on location in the country: most NRIS coordinates were derived from tracing out latitude and longitudes off of USGS topographical quadrant maps created under the North American Datum of 1927, which differs from the current, highly accurate WGS84 GPS system used by most on-line maps. Chicago is about right, but NRIS longitudes in Washington are higher by about 4.5 seconds, and are lower by about 2.0 seconds in Maine. Latitudes differ by about 1.0 second in Florida. Some locations in this table may have been corrected to current GPS standards.
^ "National Register of Historic Places: Weekly List Actions". National Park Service, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved on February 12, 2016.
^ Numbers represent an ordering by significant words. Various colorings, defined here, differentiate National Historic Landmarks and historic districts from other NRHP buildings, structures, sites or objects.
^ The eight-digit number below each date is the number assigned to each location in the National Register Information System database, which can be viewed by clicking the number.










v
t
e


U.S. National Register of Historic Places






Topics



Architectural style categories
Contributing property
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Keeper of the Register
National Park Service
Property types








Lists by states



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming








Lists by insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Minor Outlying Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands








Lists by associated states



Federated States of Micronesia
Marshall Islands
Palau








Other areas



District of Columbia
Morocco











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject











 
						