From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search






This article relies entirely upon a single source, the National Register Information System (NRIS) database or one of its mirrors. Articles based solely on the NRIS may contain errors. Please help ensure the accuracy of the information in this article by citing at least one more reliable source. (November 2013)





Dunlap Archeological District




U.S. National Register of Historic Places




U.S. Historic district







Fields at the site



Nearest city
Dunlap, Ohio


Area
39 acres (16 ha)


NRHP Reference #
75001421[1]


Added to NRHP
October 21, 1975


Dunlap Archeological District is a registered historic district near Dunlap, Ohio, listed in the National Register of Historic Places on October 21, 1975. It contains 0 contributing buildings.
Historic uses[edit]

Village Site
Fortification

Notes[edit]


^ Staff (2009-03-13). "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 










v
t
e


Archaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in Hamilton County, Ohio









Benham Mound
Betts-Longworth Historic District
Burchenal Mound
Clough Creek and Sand Ridge Archeological District
Colerain Works Archeological District
Conrad Mound Archeological Site
Dravo Gravel Site
Dunlap Archeological District
Hahn Field Archeological District
Mariemont Embankment and Village Site
Mariemont Historic District
Mathew Mound
Mt. Nebo Archaeological District
Odd Fellows' Cemetery Mound
Perin Village Site
Norwood Mound
Rennert Mound Archeological District
Shawnee Lookout Archeological District
Short Woods Park Mound
State Line Archeological District
Story Mound
Turpin Site
Wesley Butler Archeological District














Keeper of the Register
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Property types
Historic district
Contributing property











This article about a property in Hamilton County, Ohio on the National Register of Historic Places is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e








 
						